the notorious bermuda triangle in the
north atlantic ocean
makes people ships and airplanes vanish
into thin air
some experts blame bad weather
conditions others
are sure the reason is heavy traffic in
the area
and human error many people believe in
conspiracy theories
aliens the lost city of atlantis or even
a massive meteorite lying on the ocean
floor
there are also those who deny there's
anything unusual about the triangle
and still the mystery remains
but few people know that the south
atlantic ocean has an enigma of its own
well not the ocean itself but a patch of
space
above this area it's dubbed the bermuda
triangle
of space or the south atlantic anomaly
there earth's protection against solar
radiation is
much weaker than anywhere else when
spacecraft get into this region
all kinds of serious problems occur to
them for example
their equipment can fail or break down
out of the blue
when nasa was launching its 2.5 billion
dollar per
severance rover in july 2020 the space
agency planners had to do their best to
avoid the space bermuda triangle
otherwise it could have easily wreaked
havoc on the spacecraft headed for mars
this bizarre region stretches from
zimbabwe
to chile the anomaly itself seems to be
connected with one of the two
van allen radiation belts these belts
are zones of intense radiation that
comes from the solar wind
charged particles get caught by our
planet's magnetic field
they form two rings that surround earth
stretching from 400
to 36 000 miles above the surface
the inner van allen belt is made up of
mostly protons
while the outer is mainly electrons by
trapping the particles
the two belts protect you and our planet
from getting harmed by solar radiation
the south atlantic anomaly lies in the
region where the inner van allen belt
comes very close to the planet's surface
in this place
earth's magnetic field is especially
weak
nothing prevents cosmic rays from
reaching as far as a mere 120 miles
above the surface
the more solar radiation the more high
energy particles gather
over the south atlantic ocean the
problem is
that this radiation hotspot sits so low
that many
satellites have to travel through it
while following their orbits
there they get bombarded by protons at a
speed of 18
000 hits per square inch per second no
wonder it affects all the electronic
systems on board the spacecraft
for example the hubble telescope passes
through the space bermuda triangle
more than 10 times a day and it can't
collect information
when it's in that region if the
equipment
isn't put into safe mode all spacecraft
systems can fail
plus the more complicated electronics
become
the more problems occur in the area of
the south atlantic anomaly
and the more costly the damage is
the spacex crs-1 dragon spacecraft
almost went out of control in october
2012.
attached to the international space
station it had serious problems while
passing through the magnetic anomaly
luckily those issues were short-lived
in march 2016 the japan aerospace
exploration agency lost contact with its
satellite hitomi it was launched about a
month before
to study processes happening in the
universe later
it was found out that the spacecraft had
broken into pieces
and crashed down to earth
one of the motion sensors reported that
the satellite was rotating
but in reality it was stable when the
control system tried to prevent the
unwanted
and non-existent spin the spacecraft
fell to pieces
this accident cost almost 280 million
dollars
and three years of preparation but
returning to the earth's magnetic field
why is it weaker above the south
atlantic ocean
rather than being a perfect sphere our
planet bulges in the middle
if you measured earth's diameter at the
equator it would be 27 miles wider
than the pole to pole one in the areas
where there's a dip
charged particles from space can get
closer to our planet's surface
the magnetic field is created when
liquid metals flow
in our planet's outer core this
generates electric currents
and also gives earth its south and north
poles
but these poles aren't constant because
our planet's magnetic field
is constantly shifting sometimes it's
getting weaker
and at other times it's growing stronger
right now the earth's magnetic field is
weakening
this process started more than one
thousand years ago
scientists don't deny that one day
earth's magnetic poles
might flip then the north pole will
become the south
and vice versa such a phenomenon has
been happening
all the way throughout the history of
our planet the last time
it occurred around 780 000 years ago
experts are still unsure if such a flip
is going to happen this time
after all it's not an instant change
this long process can even reverse all
of a sudden
something like that happened 40 000
years ago
at that time earth was really close to
renaming its north magnetic pole to the
south
but that brisk event turned out to be
not a full reversal
while scientists were trying to figure
out how long the south atlantic anomaly
had been around
they made a curious geological discovery
it showed what our planet's magnetic
field looked like several thousand years
ago
the bantu people were a tribe of ancient
africans
who lived about 1 000 years ago in the
region of the limpopo river valley
nowadays this area is inside the south
atlantic anomaly
bantu people had an odd ritual during
droughts
they burned their own clay huts they
hoped such a sacrifice would make it
rain
but when clay burned at high
temperatures the magnetic
minerals in it aligned with earth's
magnetic field
that's why when the substance cooled
down the minerals
showed the planet's magnetic field
pattern
it helped the scientists learn that the
process of the weakening of the
magnetosphere
started long ago the clay patterns even
specified
certain periods of time when the process
was especially
active 400 to 450 ce
700 to 750 ce and 1225 to 1550 ce
even better the researchers likely found
the answer to the mystery of the space
bermuda triangle
they noticed there was something unusual
about the boundary
lying between our planet's silicate
mantle and its liquid
iron nickel outer core this region is
almost
1800 miles beneath earth's surface
and that's where a huge reservoir of
super dense rock sits
some experts state that the thing might
be tens of millions of years old
and thousands of miles wide
it's not 100 clear how a rock even if
it's that big
can interfere with the magnetic field of
the entire planet
it might be because it's located right
between earth's boiling
outer core and the mantle which is much
stiffer
and cooler the enormous boulder might be
disturbing the layer of iron and it's
the very thing
that helps to form our planet's magnetic
field
whatever the reason is exactly under
africa
the magnetic field is reversed and
that's what's likely to cause the
anomaly that affects spacecraft
at first the scientists thought their
discovery meant the magnetic field was
about to flip again
if it was true our planet would go
through several catastrophic events
the continents would start to lurch in
different directions
it would trigger catastrophic
earthquakes lead to the disappearance of
many species
and provoke climate changes
luckily there's no evidence that the
consequences of the pole reversal
would be that bad even better it might
not happen at all
after more research it became clear that
the bermuda triangle of space
isn't a sign of an upcoming pole
reversal the events taking place
under the continent are more likely to
be part of a bigger scale pattern
but the south atlantic anomaly is scary
enough on its own
if this area keeps growing it'll cause
problems
not only in space but also on earth
computers and other electronic equipment
will fail
or stop working altogether right now
the radiation is less intense in the
lower layers of the anomaly than in its
upper part
but over the past 150 years the magnetic
field in the region
has lost more than 15 percent of its
strength
it doesn't mean earth will be left
unprotected from the sun's radiation in
the nearest future
experts are sure this won't happen for
at least another billion years plus
some kind of magnetic field always
existed during the times of the magnetic
poles reversal
even though it was weaker and more
complicated than the modern one